Cullohill Apple Pie

Serves 8-12

In season: all year


This tart was a favourite of patrons of my family's pub the Sportmans Inn in Cullohill, Co Laois. The pastry is made by the creaming method so people who are convinced that they suffer from 'hot hands' don't have to worry about rubbing in the butter. Use it for a variety of fruit tarts. It can be difficult to handle when its first made and benefits from being chilled for at least an hour. Better still, if rested overnight.

Pastry
225g (8oz) butter
50g (2oz) castor sugar
2 eggs, preferably free-range and organic
340g (12oz) white flour, preferably unbleached
Filling
675g (1½lb) Bramley Seedling cooking apples
140g (5oz) sugar
2-3 cloves

egg wash

castor sugar for sprinkling
To serve
softly whipped cream
barbados sugar

1 rectangular tin, 18cm(7 inch) x 30.5cm (12 inch) x 2.5cm (1inch) deep or 1 x 23cm (9inch) round tin

Preheat the oven to 180°C/350°F/regulo 4.

First make the pastry. Beat the butter and sugar together by hand or in a food mixer (no need to over cream). Add the eggs and beat for several minutes. Reduce the speed and mix in the flour. Turn out onto a piece of floured greaseproof paper, flatten into a round wrap and chill. This pastry needs to be chilled for at least 1 hour otherwise it is difficult to handle. 
To make the tart
Use a little less then two/thirds of the pastry to line the choose tin.
Roll the pastry 3mm (1/8inch) thick approx. Peel, quarter and dice the apples into the tart tin. Sprinkle with sugar and add the cloves. Cover with a lid of pastry, seal edges, decorate with pastry leaves, stars, heart shapes or whatever takes your fancy. Brush with egg wash and bake in the preheated oven until the apples are tender, 45 minutes to 1 hour. When cooked cut into squares, sprinkle lightly with castor sugar and serve with softly whipped cream and Barbados sugar. Serve. 

Rhubarb Tart
Make in exactly the same way but use approx. 680-900g (1½-2lb) sliced  red rhubarb (about ½ inch thick) and approx. 340-400g (12-14oz) sugar.
Alternative Suggestions
Rhubarb and Strawberry
Green Gooseberry and Elderflower
Apple and Mincemeat
Apple and Raspberry 
Apple and Loganberry
Apple and Mixed Spice
Apple, Sultanas and Cinnamon
Apple and Cranberry
Blackberry and Apple
Peach and Raspberry
Worcesterberry
Plum
Damson
Apricot
